renewed fighting in Gaza has stretched
into a second day after truce deal
between Israel and Hamas expired early
Friday explosions lit up the night sky
over the eastern part of con yunes as
International concern grew over Israeli
plans to expand its offensive to the
south of the strip the Israeli military
says it has carried out some 400 strikes
on terrorist targets since fighting
resumed with conun seeing some of the
most intense bombardment since the war
started started the Hamas controlled
Health Ministry in Gaza says almost 200
Palestinians have been killed in the
renewed hostilities the resumption in
fighting is compounding the suffering of
some 2 million Palestinians trapped
inside
Gaza with the fighting in Gaza resumed
Israel faces mounting pressure to do
more to protect Palestinian civilians as
it continues with its stated aim to
destroy Hamas and the challenge es don't
end
there an air strike on Rafa in southern
Gaza with much of Northern Gaza under
Israeli control Israel's focus is now
turning to the
South this means fighting in an even
more densely populated area than before
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
who fled the north are now
here the Israel Defense Forces released
a map showing Gaza divided into numbered
sections this means that will receive
evacuation notices based on the number
of the section they live in and should
make it easier to evacuate civilians
before an area comes under
attack however in fleeing they may
expose themselves to an attack as well
which happened when Palestinians fled
the
north another challenge Israel says more
than 130 hostages are still in Gaza many
of them soldiers that Hamas wants to
trade for its own high value prisoners
in Israel many are thought to be held in
the
South there are fears that
indiscriminate bombing from the air
could kill hostages as well as their
captors and
civilians Israel also faces
International pressure especially from
the US which is Israel's main Ally and
Backer there is political turmoil in the
US over civilian casualties in Gaza and
the government worries that Israel has
no EX plan from the
war but Israel has the most
sophisticated one of the most
sophisticated militaries in the world it
is capable of neutralizing the threat
posed by Hamas while minimizing harm to
innocent men women and children and it
has an obligation to do
so Israel says the need to eradicate
hamas's threat is overriding all other
concerns but after 8 weeks of war and
with a death toll of over 15,000
Palestinians it might soon need to
re-evaluate its plans
DW's Tanya Kramer joins us now from
Jerusalem Tanya Israel says it hit more
than 200 Targets in Gaza on Friday with
a clear focus on the increasingly
congested South and I say congested
because in the early days of this
conflict it's where Israel had urged
gazin to flee what's the situation there
now well absolutely there have been a
lot of reports coming out of Gaza of
course we are not on the ground there uh
from heavy uh air strikes across Gaza
but also uh mainly focused uh on uh
Southern uh cities in Gaza there has
also been some rocket fire uh coming out
from Gaza overnight uh but the main
Center seems to be uh right now in the
center like uh areas like the AL balak
or Khan Unis where people have a city in
the south of the Gaza Strip where people
in the Eastern Parts have been asked
again to move towards the west or
towards further south um but of course
you know we we've he we've heard from
Israeli officials that they are saying
uh they're assuming some of the Hamas
leadership might be in Kan yunus that
might uh indicate why there's so much
attention uh to this place right now but
as you said with 1.8 million uh uh
residents in Gaza Palestinians there you
know being displaced and having been
told to go to the South uh to seek uh
you know in some safe areas where there
are no safe areas it's a very difficult
situation uh for the civilian population
and the Israeli military has also
released a map on Friday uh saying that
they had uh um split Gaza into uh
different uh areas and districts uh as
they are saying this should indicate to
Residents where they combat active
combat zones but of course uh
humanitarian organizations have very
strongly criticized this that this is
not the protection of civilians because
they have simply uh no safe area to go
also in the South uh we've seen also
before the pause of fighting there have
been air strikes there with a lot of
Civilian casualties some military
experts here some military analysts in
Israel have said that this could be an
indication uh that potentially Israel
might um expand its ground offensive
also uh towards the South but that is of
course very very difficult there for the
civilian population in these areas m
and for the families of remaining
hostages and of course besieged Gins the
fact the truce has ended must of course
be a blow what hopes if any are there
for any possible
ceasefire well it's really too early to
tell um this was the uh concern all
along that this is just a pause in
fighting um of course hostages Israeli
hostages uh that were held in Gaza um
have been released east of course not
all of them many remain in Gaza and then
humanitarian Aid came in but as the
report indicated uh uh not nearly enough
to meet uh all the needs but right now
uh the fighting is back uh the war is in
full force with uh dire consequences for
the civilian population and there's no
indication if both sides would agree uh
soon on another fighting uh PA and
fighting that is Tanya Kramer thank you
so much
Tanya for more let's bring in military
expert Frank ledwidge in Oxford Frank uh
the war is now very much focused on the
south of the Gaza Strip where thousands
of gazans have fled since the beginning
of the conflict is it possible to fight
a war there and still protect
civilians well good morning Michael the
answer is evidently no and we discover
yesterday that the targeting system the
Israelis are using which is generating
so many targets every day and integrates
all the intelligence sources human
intelligence a air intelligence space
signals is in fact driven by AI which
raises real concerns I think for
ethicists indeed for military
professionals as to the automation of
warfare so in other words the target
list is generated and then choices are
made and those choic will often have a
bias to them of acceptance that seems to
be the case so to come back to your
question
self-evidently uh we've seen so far it's
very difficult to do that but especially
if your target list is extremely long
you just tick them off and there they
are usually what would happen is every
strike would have something called a CO
collateral damage estimate in most
Western countries and I think Israel
used to do that very difficult to do
that when you're striking hundreds of
targets every day uh just one gloss on
what Tanya said I little doubt that the
ground wall will extend to the South it
will need to do so in due course of
Israel's to meet its objectives
meanwhile that ground war is carrying on
very intensively alongside the air
strikes in the north of
Gaza right um one of the biggest
challenges and we' we've talked about
this I'm sure in the past one of the
biggest challenges the IDF faces is
dealing with hamas's tunnel system as
someone with General combat experience
how difficult do you imagine it is for
the Israeli military to fight
there well Michael Israel's been
preparing for the Gaza Metro as people
call it the 500 kilometers or so or so
it said of uh deep tunnels within Gaza
and they have been dealing with them
comprehensively since the start of this
this campaign air and ground so for
example just before the ceasefire the
Israelis announced that they had found
in the north of Gaza where their
soldiers are in excess of 400 tunnel
entrances now it's all very well of
course finding the T tunnel entrances
but of course the tunnels are up to 50
some say even more meters deep and no
Israeli soldier however Elite and the
Israeli combat engineer tunnel Corp uh
is an elite unit are going to go down
there themselves so they will be using
robotics there are clearly other devices
use I mean there's various forms of foam
for example there's some talk of
flooding the tunnels from the sea
uh theyve all kinds of devices for
dealing with these things but the point
is that this is that's the military
center of gravity for Hamas the tunnel
system it's where they are and it's why
many of those bombs that you see are
produce so much damage because what the
Israelis are trying to do is trying to
get down into that tunnel system using
bunker buster other kinds of bombs many
of them by the way supplied by the
United
States Frank of course we don't know
definitively where the remaining
hostages are one has to imagine that a
good number of them if not all of them
are somewhere along that tunnel system
how dangerous is the situation now for
those remaining hostages in
Gaza yeah some interesting comments came
out clearly the when when some of the
hostages were released and a few details
of their de briefs were released now
clearly look the reality is that all of
those hostages will now or will have
been be debriefed by Israeli
intelligence in detail to try and
determine where they were uh How deep
the tunnels were what their perceptions
were how many hostages in each place the
slight every detail counts because
that's is where they were and the
debriefs that we've seen or the readouts
from them obviously these Israelis for
very good reasons are keeping that very
close hole very tight uh indicate that
course of course that's where the
hostages are but I don't think Israeli
Special Forces and Israeli hostage
recovery teams are particularly have a
particular expectation that they're
going to find them be able to get in and
get them clearly that the aim here is as
far as possible to negotiate them out at
the moment that's a military expert
Frank ledwidge in Oxford as ever many
thanks
Frank thank you
Michael and for more on this we welcome
now journalist hassim baloa from Jordan
uh hasham the UN humanitarian office has
said that hell on Earth has returned to
Gaza you were reporting for us from
there at the beginning of the conflict
you're now in Jordan you have friends
and relatives back there how do they say
the situation is
now indeed um this is what um the people
say um hostilities uh resumed since uh
Friday morning uh arist
um across the Gaza STP in different
areas um um there is movement of of some
tanks in different in in certain areas
especially in East ofun in th Gaza stb
um in jabalia in the north east of Gaza
City uh as well some people were asked
to evacuate um um recently there was a
um an air strike on jabalia refugee camp
in fuja neighborhood um um on um um a
family house that housing over 100
people um some reports that coming from
there about 100 were killed um according
to the medical um uh um to the doctor of
the director of the kamalan hospital in
jabalia said 12 um were received 12
killed received to the hospital um I
talked to different people in kanun and
they said that air strikes didn't stop
there were uh air strikes on hammad uh
compound about six buildings were
destroyed there and it's going up to now
I think and um um people are running out
of of some certain areas and hasham big
picture wise during the past weeks we
know that thousands tens hundreds of
thousands of Palestinians have fled to
Southern Gaza which is where the
fighting is now focused so where are
people supposed to go
this is the question this is what the
people are asking they don't know I I I
talked today to someone who told me that
they um her and her and and her family
um displaced for four times um first
from their house to the father-in-law
house then to noat in Central Area then
to east of kanun and now they are in the
west of kanun they don't know where to
go I talked to other one who's from K
east of kanun and told me that
he he he ran he fled from his house
before the bows returned during the
seven day of the Bose and now um again
at um ran Ona School uh people um wonder
where to go they are ready they might be
asked to to to evacuate and there is no
place to go um some areas are
experiencing some ground Invasion but
other places are under air strikes as
well and
help us if you don't mind understand the
sort of no no Safe
Haven situation Israel says it's carried
out some 400 strikes on hamus since the
end of the truce hamus says that around
200 Palestinians have been killed since
that uh began do those numbers sound
plausible to you
accurate well um just like um um less
than half an hour the Ministry of Health
held um uh a press conference in Gaza
and said that the the death toll raised
over
15,000 uh actually this number of 200
were was was U uh uh for yesterday and
um today death toll is not um updated
yet so these numbers are happening
because there is uh overcrowded areas
and people are killed when there is a
single air strike or artillery
shell journalist has belala reporting
for us from
Jordan